SYLLABUS 
COSC 310 Data Structures and Algorithms

Professor:	 Dr. David T. Smith
Office:		306 Stright Hall 
Hours:		MW 9:30-10:45, TR 2:00-3:30 
Tel/Email:	724-357-4478/dtsmith@iup.edu


I. Course Description

Prerequisite: COSC110 and COSC 210?(Java)

Course provides a broad study of the fundamental concepts of data; storage systems and structures; lists, arrays, strings, hashing techniques, searching and sorting techniques; string processing.  Course will solidify intermediate level concepts of an object oriented language including inheritance, encapsulation, generics, and polymorphism.  Course content will be reinforced though lab sessions and programming assignments.  All assignments will be in the Java programming language.

This is NOT a language course.  An understanding of Java is assumed.   This is a techniques course.  While the assignments will be in Java, the techniques presented can be applied to other object oriented languages.  Course will stress good programming practices and analysis of employed techniques.
?
II. Course Objectives

     Upon successful completion of this course, the students will be able to:

A. Analyze the time and space efficiency of several significant classes of algorithms.

B. Use abstract data structures including: stacks, queues, trees, graphs, hash tables, and linked lists, that are appropriate for a given applications.

C. Implement common data structures using an object-oriented approach using a variety of algorithms and determine the effect on the performance of each algorithm.

D. Use the object-oriented approach to program design and recognize its capabilities relative to the procedural paradigm.

E. Effectively use a debugger to examine the running state of a program.

III. Detailed Course Outline
?
1. Introduction (3 hours)
a. Review of Java
b. Review of I/O
c. Review of ?good? programming practices
d. Introduction of design patterns
e. Need for data structures
f. First problem

2. Objects, classes, and class hierarchies (3 hours)
a. Abstract data types
b. Interfaces
c. Inheritance and class hierarchies.
d. Encapsulation, public and private attributes
e. Overloading and overriding
f. Polymorphism
g. Object referencing and casts
h. Multiple inheritance
i. Object Factories

3. Linear Data Structures (5 hours)
a. List interface
b. Dynamic array implementation
c. Linked list implementations - singly and doubly linked lists
d. Circular lists and multi-lists
e. Iterating over lists - iterator implementations

4. Program correctness and algorithm analysis (3 hours)
a. Program defects and bugs
b. Exception and exception handling
c. Debugging programs
d. Big O notation
e. Constant, linear, log, quadratic, and cubic

5. Stacks (3 hours)
a. Stack interface
b. Stack implementations
c. Stack applications

6. Queues (3 hours)
a. Queue interface
b. Queue implementations
c. Queue applications

7. 
Recursion (3 hours)
a. Recursive definition
b. Recursive algorithms
c. Recursive data structures
d. Backtracking

8. Hierarchical Data Structures - Trees (3 hours)
a. Tree terminology
b. Pre-order, post-order, in-order traversals
c. Implementations of binary trees
d. Binary search trees
e. Heaps and priority queues

9. Sets and Maps (3 hours)
a. Sets and the Set interface
b. Maps and the Map interface
c. Hash tables
d. Collisions 
e. Implementation of hash tables
f. HashMap and TreeMap

10. Sorting (3 hours)
a. elementary sorting techniques (exchange, selection, and insertion)
b. recursion as a programming technique
c. advanced sorting techniques (merge, heap sort, and quick sort)

11. Self-Balancing Trees (3 hours)
a. Balance and rotations
b. AVL Tree
c. Red-black trees
d. B-Trees

12. Graphs (3 hours)
a. Graph terminology
b. Graph implementations
c. Graph traversals
d. Applications of graphs

IV. 
Textbook
?
Objects, Abstraction, Data Structures and Design using Java, Koffman, Elliot B. and Wolfgang, Paul A. T, Wiley & Sons, 2nd Edition, Copyright 2010, ISBN 978-0-470-12870-1

V. Evaluation Method
?
   The grade for the course will be determined as follows:
      
     Mid Term 	30 %         
     Final	30 %              
     Assignments (8-10)	40 %

Grading Scale:

     90 - 100%	A*
     80 - 89%	B*
     70 - 79%	C
     60 - 69%	D
       0 - 59%	F

 * IMPORTANT NOTE: You need to complete all the assignments.  You will not receive a grade higher than C if you do not make a diligent effort to complete all assignments.  I will help you get through all of the assignments. 
     
WARNING: None of the assignments in this course are intended to be group projects. You are expected to work on each assignment by yourself. If you need help, ask questions in class or come to my office hours - I will help you through the problems you encounter.  You can also post question to the Moodle forum.  I check this regularly.

VI. Policies

Academic Integrity/Cheating Policy
You are expected to uphold the school?s standard of conduct relating to academic honesty.  You are responsible for the content and integrity of the academic work submitted.  VIOLATION OF THE HONOR CODE CAN INCLUDE ZERO FOR THE ASSIGNMENT (AT MININUM), FAILURE FOR THE COURSE, AND A REPORT FILED WITH THE OFFICE OF STUDENT AFFAIRS.  You are considered to be in violation of the honor code if you:

1) Provide or receive unauthorized assistance in coursework, with lab work, or during examinations or quizzes.
2) PLAGIARIZING PAPERS, ESSAYS, ASSIGNMENTS, PRESENTATIONS, COMPUTER PROJECTS, OR OTHER ACADEMIC EXERCISES BY MISREPRESENTING OR PASSING OFF THE IDEAS, WORDS, FORMULAS, OR DATA OF ANOTHER AS ONE?S OWN.
3) Using the same paper or work more than once without my prior authorization.
4) Possessing course examination materials before the administration of the exam, without my prior knowledge or consent.
5) Computer dishonesty, including: tampering with or making unauthorized change to another person?s or the university?s computer system, illegally copying computer software, personal use of another individual?s computer account, unauthorized activity involving another individual?s personal computer system or any system belonging to the university, and other unauthorized use of violations involving computer use.

Late Policy: 
Any assignment, which is turned in after the due date, will be reduced by 20%. No assignments will be accepted later than one week after the due date. The instructor, prior to the due date the assignment, must approve valid excuses for late assignments with no penalty. 

Attendance Policy
I believe that attendance is important. To encourage class attendance, I will use the following system: Attendance will be taken in some form at every class. For each unexcused absence, starting with the fourth, 2% will be deducted from your overall class grade. Generally, excused absences involve illness with a doctor's excuse, verifiable family emergencies, or conflicting university activity. Also, I start each class on time and expect you to be present when I begin; persistent tardiness is counted as absence. Fraudulent attendance results in penalties. You will be held responsible for presented material and assignments whether or not you are in class. 

Make-up Exams
Unless you contact me before the exam and obtain my permission to take a make-up exam, make-up exams will NOT be given.

Student Conduct in Class Policy
Any acts of classroom disruption that go beyond the normal rights of students to question and discuss with the instructor will not be tolerated.  The use of the computer, other than what is being taught, will also be counted against you.  DO NOT FACEBOOK, TWITTER, OR OTHER SOCIAL MEDIA WHILE IN CLASS.  DO NOT SURF THE INTERNET OR PLAY GAMES WHILE I AM LECTURING.




